welcome to topcast into chapter six of my
breakdown of the fabric of reality chapter six is
called titled universality and the limits of
computation now david deutsch is expert in
the topics he writes about in the beginning
of infinity and in the fabric of reality
but if we were to talk wheel houses
as people sometimes do the thing that
you spend your career your life pursuing then
this is one of those david deutsch has a lot of
wheelhouses but this is certainly one right in
the dead center of david deutsch's professional
interests one of the reasons for david deutsch's
fame among other physicists is because of his
contribution to this area of science which we
call computational computer science in fact it
really was down to david to bring computer science
into science itself before that it was treated as
an area of mathematics of pure mathematics
treated in the abstract and it was david who
explained how and why it should be regarded
more as a part of physics it's a simple idea
computers are made of matter matter obeys the
laws of physics therefore what computers can do
is bounded by the laws of physics this particular
chapter is one of my favorites in the entire book
it is inside bomb after insight bomb which means
i am going to take my time with passages here even
more so than what i normally would in order to
break them down or emphasize them but i'm going
to begin just by reading the first paragraph on
the first page of the book and then i'm going to
skip rather a lot and i'll explain why in just
a moment but let's get into the reading and
perhaps for those picking it up in this episode
for whatever reason the last episode was about
virtual reality generators now why on earth would
one write a book about the fabric of reality about
cosmically significant things and concentrate on
something seemingly as parochial and as quirky as
virtual reality well there is an important reason
why and that is because we human beings our minds
are essentially virtual reality rendering machines
we are minds and we are connected to the rest
of real physical reality via sensors which are
creating for us a an impression of the environment
it's a virtual reality rendering of whatever
real reality happens to be which we don't have
direct access to so virtual reality a study of
virtual reality not only gives an insight into
the workings of people but things that can
do computations more broadly and hence david
begins the chapter with quote the heart of a
virtual reality generator is its computer and the
question of what environments can be rendered in
virtual reality must eventually come down to the
question of what computations can be performed
even today the repertoire of virtual reality
generators is limited as much by their computers
as by the image generators whenever a new faster
computer with more memory and better image
processing hardware is incorporated into a virtual
reality generator the repertoire is enlarged
but will it always be so or will we eventually
encounter full universality as i have argued we
should expect in the case of image generators
in other words is there a single virtual reality
generator buildable once and for all that could
be programmed to render any environment that
the human mind is capable of experiencing
end quote but i might just i'll just um pick
up a a a couple of short paragraphs here which
speak about the limitations of computers the way
in which computers must be limited by the laws
of physics a taster so to speak of why it is that
there are these limitations placed upon computers
david rights quote a computer with an effectively
unlimited memory capacity can be envisaged in
principle but a computer with an unlimited
speed of computation cannot a computer of
given design will always have a fixed maximum
speed which only design changes can increase
end quote now why is this well because we've
got this limitation on imposed by the speed of
light stuff can't happen faster than the speed of
light and so so signals can't be sent faster than
a speed of light at the speed of light sure but
faster than the speed of light so you have this
inherent limitation imposed by the laws of
physics let's just read on a little bit further
quote therefore a given virtual reality generator
will not be able to perform unlimited amounts of
computation per unit time will this not limit its
repertoire if an environment is so complex that
the computation of what the user should be seeing
one second from now takes the machine more than
one second to compute how can the machine possibly
render that environment accurately to achieve
universality we need a further technological trick
to extend its repertoire as far as is physically
possible a virtual reality generator would have
to take control of one further attribute of the
user sensory system namely the processing speed
of the user's brain if the human brain will like
an electronic computer this would simply be a
matter of changing the rate at which its clock
emits synchronizing pulses no doubt the
brain's clock will not be so easily controlled
but again this presents no problem of principle
the brain is a finite physical object and all
its functions are physical processes which
in principle can be slowed down or stopped
the ultimate virtual reality generator
would have to be capable of doing that
end quote now i'm ending the quotation there
because then david goes into the details about
how virtual reality generators could be built
that could even tinker with your own brain
the mechanics of this is interesting and it's
worthwhile if of course i presume that people
who are listening to this have access to the book
so it might be well worth your while going to the
book and reading the few pages that i'm going
to gloss over here i'm just going to skip over
because it's about the technical details of how
one might go about in the distant future in a
technologically enlightened future where we could
directly intercept the contents of neurons let's
say and so give you the experience of whatever is
physically possible to experience via that method
of directly intervening in the neurons the action
of the neurons we don't need to go into that
please explore this part of the chapter and no
doubt the the vast majority of people listening
to this have the book if you don't get the book
and read the details because they are interesting
but basically look the idea is that with
you know an advanced neuroscience with a
cybernetic implant it's going to be possible
to tinker with neurons and hence subjective
experience given the requisite knowledge
knowing how to do that the laws of physics
do not prohibit this from happening so it must
be possible given the right knowledge so i'm
skipping those details interesting though
they are i'm um glossing over them because
the sum of everything david says is basically
encapsulated by what he goes on to say quote
for our present purposes technological obstacles
are irrelevant we are not investigating what sorts
of virtual reality generator can be built or
even necessarily what sorts of virtual reality
generator will ever be built by human engineers
we are investigating what the laws of physics do
and do not allow in the way of virtual reality
the reason why this is important has nothing to
do with the prospects for making better virtual
reality generators it is that the relationship
between virtual reality and ordinary reality is
part of the deep unexpected structure of the world
which this book is about end quote that's why
i begin this episode in the way that i did
it's not an esoteric quirky sort of bit of
technology this virtual reality stuff it provides
an insight into how it is that knowledge can
be constructed about the world and what our
situation is what our relationship is with the
rest of physical reality david goes on quote
by considering various tricks nerve stimulation
stopping and starting the brain and so on
we have managed to envisage a physically possible
virtual reality generator whose repertoire covers
the entire sensory range is fully interactive
and is not constrained by the speed or memory
capacity of its computer is there anything
outside the repertoire of such a virtual reality
generator would its repertoire be the set of
all logically possible environments it would not
even this futuristic machine's repertoire is
drastically circumscribed by the mere fact
of its being a physical object it does not even
scratch the surface of what is logically possible
as i shall now show pausing there my
reflection what he's going to show
and what he's about to launch into is the diagonal
argument which if you are a long time listener to
talk cast you will have encountered before
the beginning of infinity also goes through
explanations of diagonal arguments this is
a really interesting one a way of showing
how even a machine which can render all
environments that can be experienced by a person
does not contain in its repertoire all
logically possible environments there are
things it can't do and in fact the things that
can't do vastly outnumber the things that it can
do even though we've begun this whole exercise
by trying to define into existence the machine
that can do anything when it comes to virtual
reality it can render any environment we're
about to see that in fact the attempt to do that
the attempt to realize that in physical reality
is impossible why david explains quote the basic
idea of the proof known as a diagonal argument
predates the idea of virtual reality it was first
used by the 19th century mathematician georg
cantor to prove that there are infinite quantities
greater than the infinity of natural numbers
1 2 3 the integers the same form of proof is at
the heart of the modern theory of computation
developed by alan during and others in the 1930s
it was also used by kurt gertle in his celebrated
incompleteness theorem of which more in chapter
10. each environment in our machine's repertoire
is generated by some program for its computer
imagine the set of all valid programs for this
computer from a physical point of view each such
program specifies a particular set of values for
physical variables on the disks or other media
that represent the computer's program we know
from quantum theory that all such variables are
quantized and therefore that no matter how the
computer works the set of possible programs is
discrete each program can therefore be expressed
as a finite sequence of symbols in a discrete code
or computer language there are infinitely many
such programs but each one can contain only
a finite number of symbols that is because
symbols are physical objects made of matter in
recognizable configurations and one could not
manufacture an infinite number of them as i shall
explain in chapter 10 these intuitively obvious
physical requirements that the programs must be
quantized and that each of them must consist of
a finite number of symbols and can be executed in
a sequence of steps a more substantive than they
seem they are the only consequences of the laws
of physics that are needed as input for the proof
though they are enough to impose drastic
restrictions on the repertoire of any
physically possible machine other physical laws
may impose even more restrictions but they would
not affect the conclusions of this chapter end
quote okay so what we've got here is the setup of
the concept that we have this computer and the
computer can run an infinite number of different
programs but it has a repertoire which means the
set of all programs and the set can be infinite of
course you can have infinite sets the lists that
are infinitely long okay there's no end to them so
there's no end to the number of programs in this
set it's infinite now some people have a lot of
difficulty with this concept that if something
is infinite it might not necessarily contain
everything logically possible but a simple way
of understanding this is you just think of the
you know the set of all positive numbers 0 1 2 3
4 5 off into infinity it clearly doesn't contain
all the numbers okay specifically if you were to
say well it's only the integers well it doesn't
contain a half a third and so on and so forth and
it doesn't contain the negative numbers okay so
there are things that aren't in that set there
are numbers not in that set even though it's got
an infinite number of numbers similarly we're
going to get to here this idea that although
there's an infinite number of different logically
possible of possible environments that this that
can be rendered by this computer uh as a
virtual reality generator it won't contain
everything that's that is logically possible it
won't contain everything that's logically possible
so that's the setup david goes on to say quote
now let us imagine this infinite set of possible
programs arranged in an infinitely long list
and numbered program one program two and so on
they could for instance be arranged in
alphabetical order with respect to the symbols
in which they are expressed because each program
generates an environment this list can also be
regarded as a list of all the environments
in the machine's repertoire we may call them
environment one environment two and so on it could
be that some of the environments are repeated
in the list because two different programs
might in effect perform the same calculations
but that will not affect the argument what
is important is that each environment in our
machine's repertoire should appear at least once
in the list david makes a few more remarks that
i'm going to again skip over and pick it up where
he says quote let me define a class of logically
possible environments which i shall call can't
go to environments that's spelt c-a-n-t g-o-t-u
can't go to environments partly in honor of cantor
girdle and turing and partly for a reason i shall
explain shortly end quote very clever clever
little name there can't go to environments and
then and due to cantor girdle and turing let's
keep going quote they are defined as follows
for the first subjective minute a can't
go to environment behaves differently from
environment one generated by program one of our
generator it does not matter how it does behave so
long as it is to the user recognizably different
from environment one during the second minute it
behaves differently from environment two though it
is now allowed to resemble environment one again
during the third minute it behaves
differently from environment three
and so on any environment that satisfies these
rules i shall call i can't go to environment
now since a can't go to environment does
not behave exactly like environment one
it cannot be environment one since it does not
behave exactly like environment 2 it cannot be
environment 2. since it is guaranteed sooner or
later to behave differently from environment 3
environment 4 and every other environment on the
list it cannot be any of those either but that
list contains all the environments that are
generated by every possible program for this
machine it follows that none of the can't go to
environments are in the machine's repertoire but
can't go to environments our environments that we
can't go to using this virtual reality generator
end quote pausing there that's the diagonal
lag that's a kind of diagonal argument
it illustrates a couple of things that this
infinitely long list that can of programs
that can render any environment at all all the
environments that are possible limited only by the
memory capacity of the computer let's say you've
got environment one that it can render maybe it
looks like earth it is as it is today environment
too maybe it is earth as it was yesterday
and repeat for all the days in the past and then
for environments on mars and so on and so forth
this infinitely long list of environments
that the computer can generate based upon
programs in the computer but the ones that it
can't render are infinitely greater in number
there's many many more after all environment one
is one such environment that can be rendered now
all that we require is that our our our can
our first can't go to environment differs from
environment one in any way shape or form but
there's an infinite number of ways in which it
could differ from environment one so already we've
got an infinite number of ways it could different
there can infinite number of ways it could differ
from environment two and so on and so forth so
the ones that can't be rendered that can't go
to environments vastly outnumber the the number
of environments that can be rendered even though
the ones that can be rendered are infinite number
okay let's keep going david writes quote clearly
there are enormously many can't go to environments
because the definition leaves enormous
freedom in choosing how they should behave
the only constraint being that during each minute
they should not behave in one particular way
it can be proved that for every environment in the
repertoire of a given virtual reality generator
there are infinitely many can't go to environments
that it cannot render nor is there much scope for
extending the repertoire by using a range of
different virtual reality generators okay now
end quote i won't go on and read the explanation
of that leave that as an exercise to the reader
instead i'll pick it up where david writes
quote thus our hypothetical project of building
the ultimate virtual reality generator which
had been going so well has suddenly run into a
brick wall whatever improvements may be made
in the distant future the repertoire of the
entire technology of virtual reality will never
grow beyond a certain fixed set of environments
admittedly this set is infinitely large and very
diverse by comparison with human experience prior
to virtual reality technology nevertheless it is
only an infinitesimal fraction of the set of all
logically possible environments what would it
feel like to be in a can't go to environment
although the laws of physics do not permit us
to be in one it is still logically possible
and so it is legitimate to ask what it would feel
like certainly it could give us no new sensations
because a universal image generator is possible
and is assumed to be part of our high technology
virtual reality generator so a can't go to
environment would seem mysterious to us only after
we had experienced it and reflected on the results
it would go something like this suppose you are a
virtual reality buff in the distant ultra high
technology future you have become jaded for it
seems to you that you've already tried everything
interesting but then one day a genie appears and
claims to be able to transport you to a can't go
to environment you are skeptical but you agree to
put the claim to the test you are whisked away to
the environment after a few experiments you seem
to recognize it it responds just like one of your
favorite environments which on your home virtual
reality system has program number x however you
keep experimenting and eventually during the
x subjective minute of the experience the
environment responds in a way that is markedly
different from anything that environment x
would do so you give up the idea that this is
environment x you may then notice that everything
that has happened so far is also consistent with
another renderable environment environment y
but then during the y subjective minutes you
are proved wrong again the characteristic of a
can go to environment is simply this no matter
how often you guess no matter how complex a
program you contemplate as being the one that
might be rendering the environment you will always
be proved wrong because no program will render it
on your virtual reality generator or on any other
sooner or later you will have to bring the test
to a close at that point you may well decide to
concede the genie's claim that is not to say that
you could ever prove that you had been in a can't
go to environment for there is always an even more
complex program that the genie might have been
running which would match your experiences so far
that is just the general feature of
virtual reality that i've already discussed
namely that experience cannot prove that one is
in a given environment be it the centre court
at wimbledon or an environment of the can't go to
type end quote so that that uh that harks back to
the previous chapter talking about not knowing
that you are fight not being able to confirm
that you are on an actual rendering of the real
wimbledon which is to say you can't confirm
you can only ever disconfirm logically speaking
moving on david writes quote anyway there are
no such genies and no such environments so we
must conclude that physics does not allow the
repertoire of a virtual reality generator to be
anywhere near as large as logic alone would allow
how large can it be since we cannot hope to
render all logically possible environments let us
consider a weaker but ultimately more interesting
sort of universality let us define a universal
virtual reality generator as one whose repertoire
contains that of every other physically possible
virtual reality generator can such a machine exist
it can thinking about futuristic devices based on
computer controlled nerve stimulation makes this
obvious in fact almost too obvious such a machine
could be programmed to have the characteristics
of any rival machine it could calculate how that
machine would respond under any given program to
any behavior by the user and so could render those
responses with perfect accuracy from the point of
view of a given user any given user pausing near
my reflection just perfect accuracy there remember
that was defined in the previous chapter and it's
basically where the user themselves is unable to
distinguish and if you're unable to distinguish
you know x from y then to you to the
perfect degree of accuracy x is equal to y
all right that's all it's just the subjective
perfect accuracy it's not perfect accuracy in
real life in sort of on an objective sense
which doesn't exist let's keep going quote
i say this is almost too obvious because it
contains an important assumption about what the
proposed device or more specifically its computer
could be programmed to do given the appropriate
program and enough time and storage media it
could calculate the output of any computation
performed by any other computer including the
one in the rival virtual reality generator thus
the feasibility of a universal virtual reality
generator depends on the existence of a universal
computer a single machine that can calculate
anything that can be calculated as i have said
this sort of universality was first studied not by
physicists but by mathematicians they were trying
to make precise the intuitive notion of computing
or calculating or proving something in mathematics
they did not take on board the fact that
mathematical calculation is a physical process
in particular as i've explained it is a virtual
reality rendering process so it is impossible to
determine by mathematical reasoning what can or
cannot be calculated mathematically that depends
entirely on the laws of physics but instead of
trying to deduce their results from physical laws
mathematicians postulated abstract models of
computation and defined calculation and proof
in terms of those models i shall discuss this
interesting mistake in chapter 10. that is how it
came about that over a period of a few months in
1936 three mathematicians emel post alonso church
and most importantly alan turing independently
created the first abstract designs for universal
computers just pausing down my reflection i
might just go back um and just to mention that
this argument here this explanation about the fact
that mathematics consists of well explanations but
it it it requires calculations it it uses proofs
and computations and these things are completed by
physical systems whether the mathematician
themselves or computers and pocket calculators and
that kind of thing so abound necessarily by the
laws of physics so what is able to be proved is
limited by the set of things that the laws of
physics say is provable because you're building
computers out of matter the matter obeys laws
of physics and those laws of physics only allow
certain kinds of things to be proved the laws of
physics bound what can be mathematically proved
okay so many mathematicians don't like that that
doesn't matter doesn't affect the fact that it's
true many people don't like that they think that
somehow mathematics has to be prior to physics
in some sense now all that said the precisely
the same argument applies even more broadly
to reasoning in general reasoning in general
you can't get outside of the laws of physics
what can be known is bounded by the laws
of physics and so philosophy epistemology
reasoning itself is done by physical things human
beings brains minds and they obey laws of physics
so it is the laws of physics that
constrain the possibility of what we can
think what we can know what we can reason this
is not a problem as such but it's just worth
keeping in view and understanding it does
come to bear on our capacity to know but
it doesn't come on our it doesn't come to bear
on our capacity to solve problems that we're
interested in in particular it's the very thing
that allows us to know that problems are soluble
problems are soluble precisely because
well the physical structure of our brain
what it's able to do uniquely is generate
explanations which can be in one-to-one
correspondence with the rest of physical reality
that's what the laws of physics allow they provide
provide the laws of provide constraints but
allow for that and therefore allow for the
solving in principle of any possible problem we
could encounter problems are soluble and david's
going to get to that essentially get to that
in this chapter but i i think one reason i'm
also saying that is that that philosophers who are
sometimes disconnected to some extent from physics
failed to take this into account and
think that the physics can be irrelevant
to what they're doing but it's not not utterly
irrelevant it's not to say that everything reduces
to physics i'm not being reductionist in this
sense or that that the philosopher needs to refer
to what's going on in physics now and again but
the reasoning itself it has to be understood is
itself bounded by what the laws of physics permit
us to reason about and and you know so if you if
you're trying to you know uh the common the common
area here that really i guess i'm i'm circling is
um the prophecy the philosophers epistemologists
others who don't take this on board fully
think that there must be a mechanism whether by
induction or something else that allows them to
forecast the future perfectly accurately but that
is in contravention to laws or physics it's that
kind of thing that importantly is constrained by
laws of physics laws of physics set a bound on
what is knowable and one thing that's not knowable
is the creation of knowledge knowledge creation
the future cannot be known with perfect fidelity
also because of laws of physics as well as the
fact that uh people create explanatory knowledge
which um changes the future in ways that cannot be
known ahead of time okay that's a major theme
of beginning affinity a theme throughout top
cast as well so i'll just point to earlier
work on that kind of stuff rather than um
uh going down the road of making that argument
again but just to say that a knowledge of this
kind of physics can help with the philosopher
and the epistemologist or people who are
interested in knowledge rather than being utterly
disconnected from things and i think that where
where some philosophers go wrong especially when
they fall into pessimism it can be because of this
okay back to the book we're talking about how
emerald post alonso church and alan turing most
importantly created the first abstract designs
for universal computers okay so abstract designs
important to know not a physical design
abstract mathematical theory of the computer
without being concerned about the physical
laws that actually control these things
david writes on this each of them conjectured
that his model of computation did indeed correctly
formalize the traditional intuitive notion of
mathematical computation consequently each of them
also conjectured that his model was equivalent to
had the same repertoire as any other reasonable
formalization of the same intuition this is now
known as the church turing conjecture turing's
model of computation and his conception of
the nature of the problem he was solving
was the closest to being physical his abstract
computer the turing machine was abstracted from
the idea of a paper tape divided into squares with
one of a finite number of easily distinguishable
symbols written on each square computation was
performed by examining one square at a time
moving the tape backwards or forwards and erasing
or writing one of the symbols according to simple
unambiguous rules pausing near my reflection this
is one of the most jarring insights that goes
unsaid untaught unlearned i think these days
unless one takes on pure mathematics course
takes an interest in this kind of thing
goes into computer science whatever
that no matter how diverse this technology of
computers becomes how ubiquitous it becomes
that all of it can be modeled okay but modulo
what david is about to say and the insights that
david brings with quantum computation all that
other stuff but it can be modeled by reduced too
the action of reading and infinitely well
not not infinite but you know a very long
tape divided into squares with symbols written on
it that's what computers do it doesn't matter how
complicated the program it could be running a word
processor it could be simulating the collision of
galaxies it could be running a computer game
it could be you know um facebook or twitter or
a flight simulator whatever the program is
whatever the thing is the computer can do
is based upon code a program and that itself
can be represented as symbols of zeros and ones
on a long strip of paper remarkable absolutely
remarkable and when you get into the details
of this that how this in principle could be done
for any program is is is perhaps jarring to people
that a complicated computer program could reduce
to such a simple thing such a simple idea and this
is the first model of computation which predated
the existence of any actual computer that had been
built okay any electronic computer let's keep
going and david writes quote turing proved that
one particular computer of this type the universal
turing machine had the combined repertoire
of all other turing machines he conjectured
that this repertoire consisted precisely of
every function that would naturally be regarded as
computable he meant computable by mathematicians
but mathematicians are rather untypical physical
objects why should we assume that rendering them
in the act of performing calculations is the
ultimate in computational tasks it turns out that
it is not as i shall explain in chapter 9 quantum
computers can perform computations of which no
human mathematician will ever even in principle be
capable pausing there my reflection now why should
there be things that a human mathematician cannot
even in principle calculate does this violate the
universality of the human mind it doesn't why
well because calculation is not explanation
now quantum computers harness something called
entanglement and interference phenomena i go to
top casts that are about the multiverse to go
into that or to read uh sections of the fabric
of reality or or the beginning of infinity
to understand or have have more insight into
entanglement and interference for anyone
but anyway quantum computers use this
but this is not how brains presumably do what
they do that's not how they do their computations
so although a person cannot calculate what a
quantum computer can you know a person can't
quickly do the prime factorization of a 15 digit
number or calculate the position let's say of
electrons in some uranium atom this does not
prevent us from understanding those things and
what is going on there and using technology to
do it we can still understand that we can still
explain those things that that phenomena there is
a difference between calculation which in physics
allows you know some precise prediction and
understanding the explanation that allows for that
prediction to be made we're still universal human
beings are people people are universal universal
explainers not universal calculators indeed i
don't think there can be a universal calculator
after all all we need to do is to just think of
a number large enough whose prime factorization
could never be done even in the multiverse
no matter how much time you gave it just
whatever number that is i don't know 10 to
the power of 10 to the power of a million
to the power of 7 or something i don't know
there must be some number out there which
um it's just so large that the prime factorization
will just take you know longer than the life of
the universe but maybe the universe goes on
forever maybe if the universe is eternal and
this computer lasted forever and had an eternal
amount and an infinite amount of energy maybe then
you could have this universal calculator but put
aside that there are non-computable functions as
as turing and particular girdle prove there are
these non-computable things anyway okay let's go
back to the book quote it is implicit in turing's
work that he expected what would naturally be
regarded as computable to be also what could
at least in principle be computed in nature
this expectation is tantamount to a stronger
physical version of the church turing conjecture
the mathematician roger penrose has suggested
that it should be called the turing principle the
turing principle for abstract computers simulating
physical objects there exists an abstract
universal computer whose repertoire includes any
computation that any physically possible object
can perform so that's the turing principle david
goes on to say turing believed that the universal
computer in question was the universal turing
machine to take account of the wider repertoire of
quantum computers i have stated the principle
in a form that does not specify which particular
abstract computer does the job pausing my
reflection yes so this is david's addition
to turing's work the generalization of of what
turing started turing's principle david proved
uh and which which laid the foundations for
quantum computation that there is such a
physical object that can be constructed that
is able to do the computations of anything of
any any any computable thing can be computed
by this particular thing and that includes
um anything made of matter obeying laws of
physics is going to be its behavior is going to be
computable it goes on to say quote the proof i've
given of the existence of can't go to environments
is essentially due to turing as i said he was not
thinking explicitly in terms of virtual reality
but an environment that can be rendered does
correspond to a class of mathematical questions
whose answers can be calculated those questions
are computable the remainder the questions for
which there is no way of calculating the answer
are called non-computable if a question is
non-computable that does not mean that it has
no answer or that its answer is in any sense
ill-defined or ambiguous on the contrary it means
that it definitely has an answer it is just that
there physically is no way even in principle
of obtaining that answer or more precisely
since one could always make a lucky unverifiable
guess of proving that is the answer for example
a prime pair is a pair of prime numbers whose
difference is 2 such as 3 and 5 or 11 and 13.
mathematicians have tried in vain to answer the
question whether there are infinitely many such
pairs or only a finite number of them it is not
even known whether this question is computable
let us suppose that it is not that is to say that
no one and no computer can ever produce a proof
either that there are only finitely many prime
pairs or that there are infinitely many even so
the question does have an answer one can
say with certainty that either there is
a highest prime pair or there are infinitely
many prime pairs there's no third possibility
the question remains well defined even though we
may never know the answer in virtual reality terms
no physically possible virtual reality generator
can render an environment in which answers to
non-computable questions are provided to the user
on demand such environments are of the can't go to
type and conversely every can't go to environment
corresponds to a class of mathematical questions
what would happen next in an environment defined
in such in such a way which it is physically
possible to answer although non-computable
questions are infinitely more numerous than
computable ones they tend to be more esoteric
that is no accident it is because the parts of
mathematics that we tend to consider the
least esoteric are those we see reflected
in the behavior of physical objects in familiar
situations in such cases we can often use those
physical objects to answer questions about
the corresponding mathematical relationships
for example we can count on our fingers because
the physics of fingers naturally mimics the
arithmetic of the whole numbers from zero to
ten pausing now my reflection yeah so um pure
mathematics doesn't need to concern itself about
whether it applies to physical stuff they can pure
mathematicians can consider pure abstractions okay
the things that aren't made out of material at all
and don't obey the laws of physics even though
what can be known is constrained by lots of that
that's a separate issue quite a separate issue
the the the constraints placed on mathematics
by the laws of physics aren't constraints
that prevent mathematics from delving into
non-physical stuff indeed pure mathematics
is largely about non-physical stuff there's
a great youtube video of richard feynman talking
about mathematics and physics the relationship
between them and the math relationship between the
mathematicians and the physicists in which you go
it's almost like a stand-up routine that man was
just so engaging so entertaining and so funny
when he talks about certain things and that that
particular one i'll try and remember to provide a
link in the description to this video to that one
i can't put a clip here i'd like to be able to put
a clip here but it seems when i do that they they
take down the entire video and it's such a hassle
so i have to avoid putting clips in these days but
in it you know like a feynman's basically saying
your physicist is sort of interested in specific
cases he's not interested in general cases you
know he he goes along to the mathematician
and then he says i'm interested in you know
like the the the laws of gravity for example
in in three-dimensional space i just need
for three-dimensional space and the
mathematic the pure mathematician will say
well for an n-dimensional space here are the
theorems that follow and the physicists will
say i'm not interested in n dimensions
i'm not interested in just the arbitrary
you know sort of force i'm not interested in
arbitrary spaces of n dimensions i'm interested
in a specific case and the pure mathematician
will say well just substitute n equals three then
and then of course that finally goes on to
say something like um then of course the
physicist has to go crawling back to the
pure mathematician at some point and say
you know you're talking about those n-dimensional
spaces um uh what about the case of n equals four
because sometimes these the general case uh
turns out to be very useful for the phys for the
physicists and there is this cross pollination
that happens between physics and mathematics
of course what what is done in in math in pure
mathematics sometimes is thought to be utterly
irrelevant and you know i've mentioned before the
case of g h hardy and a mathematician's apology uh
he wrote this book about you know meeting romano
jan another famous mathematician and hardy said
hardy said of his own work that he didn't think it
would ever have any applications to anything ever
and he was quite proud of it he regarded as more
being like art okay just to just it's exploring
the space of mathematics for its own sake but in
fact his own work i think it when it went on to
be used in electrical engineering and you know had
had applications anyway it had proper applications
later on and you know that's the unpredictability
of the growth of knowledge and it can happen in
the other direction as well you know physicists
can can do work in physics which then goes on to
have a bearing on what happens in mathematics
i think you know things like chaos theory you
know there's first investigated by physicists
about how seemingly purely deterministic systems
bang you know simple laws can actually become
chaotic even if you assume that the classical
laws of physics the perfectly deterministic
laws everything they can lead to these
extremely complex behavior a double pendulum is is
one such thing which uh has this interestingly uh
chaotic behavior so that that comes from physics
and and goes into pure mathematics and the pure
mathematicians can explore that kind of thing but
yes if you want to laugh definitely look up um
feynman talking about mathematics and and
physics let's keep going david writes quote
the repertoires of the three very different
abstract computers defined by during church and
post was soon proved to be identical so have the
repertoires of all abstract models of mathematical
computation that have since been proposed
this is deemed to lend support to the church
turing conjecture and to the universality of the
universal turing machine however the computing
power of abstract machines has no bearing on
what is computable in reality pausing there my
reflection yes so here this is the genius of of
david deutsch this is where it comes in right
i mean yeah if you regard chewing as a genius for
the inside about all of this computation stuff
which he certainly was then so is this insight by
david okay it may seem simple in retrospect you
know like so much of science just seems simple
like why couldn't i think of that well because
you're not thinking about this particular problem
all the time you could any of us could but we
didn't it's the people that are passionately
curious and interested in these particular
problems and push the frontier of science in
this case physics and computation forward this
this whole idea that thinking about computation as
actually being physical and not merely an abstract
thing it takes insight questioning assumptions and
that can be hard which assumptions do you question
and once you question those assumptions what do
you replace them with what what's better it's
no point just saying oh let's assume that's false
well then what are you going to put in its place
if nothing does it lead to something
better or not even even recognizing
noticing in the first place that something
is an assumption at all is hard computation
is assumed to be abstract and not physical oh is
it yeah that's an assumption and i guess a lot of
the mathematicians who were doing this didn't
realize the assumptions they were making you
know who notices that kind of thing what is the
consequence of that it's like oh physics is about
dynamical laws you know you plug in the initial
conditions and you calculate what goes on next
but that's an assumption as well what if we
relaxed that assumption and considered something
deeper about what is possible and impossible why
would we ever question the very foundations of
physics who would ever do that well these things
take creative leaps don't they and those creative
leaps can be the hard part you have to sit down
and you have to be creative and you have to
think about these things they're hard and yet not
hard you know like they're hard in once someone's
done it you can look back and you go oh you
know how could it have been otherwise it's
that kind of thing but it's beforehand before
the creative act has taken place that you know
people are struggling to make the progress and
yet it always seems in retrospect oh that was so
simple i could have done that yeah you could
have but you weren't focused on that problem
were you and yet this is the kind of thing that
anyone interested in progress needs to strive
for it's not to say well you just go around
assuming everything is false and then you're
done you question everything and then you're done
no you need an alternative this is the hard part
you need to yeah take what is known now regard it
as the best explanation now figure out what could
possibly be false about it and replace that with
something better something that is going to have
consequences that you can investigate and pursue
or that others can perhaps and then you might
have a whole new field of physics let's say you
might have a whole field of quantum computation
say okay let's keep going david right quote
the scope of virtual reality and its wider
implications for the comprehensibility of nature
and other aspects of the fabric of reality depends
on whether the relevant computers are physically
realizable in particular any genuine universal
computer must itself be physically realisable
this leads to a stronger version of the turing
principle the turing principle for physical
computers simulating each other it is possible
to build a universal computer a machine that can
be programmed to perform any computation that any
other physical object can perform it follows that
if a universal image generator were controlled by
a universal computer the resulting machine would
be a universal virtual reality generator in other
words the following principle also holds the
turing principle for virtual reality generators
rendering each other it is possible to build
a virtual reality generator whose repertoire
includes that of every other physically possible
virtual reality generator now any environment can
be rendered by a virtual reality generator of some
sort for instance one could always regard a copy
of that very environment as a virtual reality
generator with perhaps a very small repertoire
so it also follows from this version of the turing
principle that any physically possible environment
can be rendered by the universal virtual reality
generator hence to express the very strong
self-similarity that exists in the structure of
reality embracing not only computations but all
physical processes the turing principle
can be stated in this all embracing form
the turing principle it is possible to build
a virtual reality generator whose repertoire
includes every physically possible environment
this is the strongest form of the turing principle
it not only tells us that various parts of reality
can resemble one another it tells us that a single
physical object buildable once and for all apart
from maintenance and a supply of additional
memory when needed can perform with unlimited
accuracy the task of describing or mimicking
any other part of the multiverse this set of
all behaviors and responses that one object
exactly mirrors the set of all behaviors and
responses of all other physically possible
objects and processes the set of all behaviors
and responses of that one object exactly mirrors
the set of all behaviors and responses of all
other physically possible objects and processes
pausing near my reflection so this is the basis of
quantum computation this says that you can build
this thing this computer quantum computer which so
long as you have the program so long as you know
what to feed into this computer it can represent
that environment it can represent that world
in particular if you have a theory of physics
then you can program it in you can model
the the rest of physical reality and
and it also implies the existence of
people who can understand because they also are
rendering these environments with their models
of science that this can be done too that
that that this is the comprehensibility of
physical reality as well well it allows for the
comprehensibility of physical reality as well
let's go on david writes on this exact
point david goes on to write quote
this is just the sort of similarity that is
necessary if according to the hope i expressed in
chapter one the fabric of reality is to be truly
unified and comprehensible if the laws of physics
as they apply to any physical object or process
are to be comprehensible they must be capable
of being embodied in another physical object the
knower pausing there my reflection so that's the
universal explainer now this particular passage
is where i say david's just dropping insight bombs
it's just so much of the
beginning of infinity yet to come
even stuff of the science of canon can't the
constructor theory and it's just deep deep stuff
so i'll go on okay and then i'm going to go
back and i'm going to read some of this again
for emphasis it's important david writes quote
it is also necessary that processes capable of
creating such knowledge be physically
possible such processes are called
science science depends on experimental
testing which means physically rendering
a law's predictions and comparing it with a
rendering of reality end quote so we've moved from
the existence of the universal computer the
turing principle to the idea that knowers are
able to come to a an understanding of physical
reality that's entailed within this and also
that science therefore is possible and physically
testing theories is possible this is all coming
from the same thing now i apologize if
anyone feels patronized that i'm just
laboring belaboring the point but it's
just um um for anyone who's new to this
the these can be deep insights and it's
one reason why because of the density of of
consequences that flow from and david pursues
these these consequences but the density of them
the number of them the depth of them means that
sometimes the world view is difficult to convey
in let's say a few tweets that it's all built
uh in a sense as a web of these interconnected
explanations about reality which have these
connections between physics mathematics
epistemology science more broadly philosophy
let's keep going david writes it also depends
on explanation and that requires abstract
laws themselves not merely their predictive
content to be capable of being rendered in
virtual reality end quote so there we have
david in the fabric of reality again you know
laying laying out the the the the deep themes of
the beginning of infinity and and again the idea
of the noah here okay then the purpose of science
the abstract laws themselves being explained not
merely being about their predictive content being
able to predict stuff instrumentalism is false
david goes on quote this is a tall order but
reality does meet it that is to say the laws of
physics meter the laws of physics by conforming to
the turing principle make it physically possible
for those same laws to become known to physical
objects thus the laws of physics may be said to
mandate their own comprehensibility end quote so
it's that kind of passage that sets the book apart
from other books it is not merely the science
it's philosophical exploration of these ideas
and hence provides a whole world of view a way of
thinking about reality that is coherent as far as
we can tell it's the deepest one that we can tell
providing for cosmic significance of people and
comprehensibility of that cosmos and it goes on
with more insight bombs but really i i just have
to without interruption without interruption uh
go go back and and just read through that okay
because david's talking about self-similarity
what is this self-similarity self-similarity is
well and i'll talk about this in my nexus video
the idea here is that in a person's mind they
represent the rest of physical reality there's
a self-similarity there's relationships between
ideas you have in your mind that correspond
to some degree of accuracy with physical reality
that's what self-similarity is and so that
that connection between us and the cosmos or
all of reality rather you know you know every
single thing that can be known makes us unique
and important so let's just go through and read
that again because it is just a one one of the
reasons why this is one of my favorite chapters
uh it's the wheelhouse of david deutch it
underscores the the world view presented to
us in in both of these books here the two this
optimistic all-encompassing way in which these
findings like the turing principle allow for
comprehensibility infinite progress solving
of problems let's just read it again let's just
read it again and enjoy it without my interruption
quote this is just the sort of self-similarity
that is necessary if according to the hope i
expressed in chapter one the fabric of reality
is to be truly unified and comprehensible
if the laws of physics as they apply to
any physical object or process are to be
comprehensible they must be capable of being
embodied in another physical object the knower
it is also necessary that processes capable of
creating such knowledge be physically possible
such processes are called science science
depends on experimental testing which means
physically rendering a law's predictions
and comparing it with a rendering of reality
it also depends on explanation and that
requires the abstract laws themselves
not merely their predictive content to be capable
of being rendered in virtual reality this is a
tall order but reality does meet it that is to say
the laws of physics meet it the laws of physics
by conforming to the turing principle make it
physically possible for those same laws to become
known to physical objects thus the laws of physics
may be said to mandate their own comprehensibility
amazing stuff the scientific view of
the deep importance of human beings
as people the scientific view the rejection of
parochialism and the principle of mediocrity
and pessimism about people as a chemical
scum that's all there that we are unique
and in some sense written into the laws of physics
okay let's keep going david right quote since
building a universal virtual reality generator is
physically possible it must actually be built in
some universes a caveat is necessary here as
i explained in chapter three we can normally
define a physically possible process as one that
actually occurs somewhere in the multiverse but
strictly speaking a universal virtual reality
generator is a limiting case that requires
arbitrarily large resources to operate
so what we mean by saying that it is
physically possible is that virtual reality
generators would repertoires arbitrarily close
to the set of all physically possible
environments exist in the multiverse
similarly since the laws of physics are capable
of being rendered they are rendered somewhere
thus it follows from the turing principle in
the strong form for which i have argued that
the laws of physics do not merely mandate their
own comprehensibility in some abstract sense
comprehensibility by abstract scientists as it
were they imply the physical existence somewhere
in the multiverse of entities that understand them
arbitrarily well i shall discuss this implication
further in later chapters pausing there just my
reflection yes so when it says there just be aware
now i'm not speaking this is me talking this
is not david talking i could be wrong mistakes
my own this could be one of them and i'm about
to make but my understanding of that there is
when he says they imply the physical existence
somewhere in the multiverse of entities that
understand them arbitrarily well he's not
saying that here right now at the same time
as us somewhere there are aliens that exist that
understand their arbitrarily well it's that we
could be those entities if we're not then someone
else will be some other species will be but we
could be that species we could be those entities
that understand the physical laws arbitrarily well
in other words people are mandated by the laws of
physics if they're possible they exist somewhere
well here we are here we are now it could be
the case that a great catastrophe wipes us out
that the bostroms and rhesus and various other
uh intellectuals who think that civilization
could come to an end we all think it could
come to an end but they they seem to be
tend to be putting their eggs into
that basket of civilization crumbling
they could be right and if they are
right then we won't be the ones that
go on to understand the physical laws
arbitrarily well but other people will okay
so so that's my understanding of that we could
be the ones i think we will be i think we will be
it appears to be the case there needs
to be a history of optimism written
that that things are getting better not
irrevocably not necessarily but there are
explanations that go into allowing for the
dynamic society which we are occupying right now
and the robustness and the resilience of
this society is growing not diminishing
of course hyperbole and pessimism is increasing
to some extent in some places but optimism is
increasing in other places as well okay so in
the west sometimes we end up having a bit of a
a blinkered view because our intellectuals
have a certain culture at the moment i think
it's transient i think that you know there'll be a
resurgence of optimism people are gonna get bored
they're gonna get bored with the constant
pessimism the constant way in which people
human beings talk down human beings and talk up
the environment this can't last this can't last
i'm hopeful okay let's keep going i don't
want to get too off track david writes
quote now i return to the question i posed
in the previous chapter namely whether if we
only had a virtual reality rendering based
on the wrong laws of physics to learn from
we should expect to learn the wrong laws the first
thing to stress is that we do have only virtual
reality based on the wrong laws to learn from as
i've said all their external experiences are of
virtual reality generated by our own brains and
since our concepts and theories whether inborn
or learned are never perfect all our renderings
are indeed inaccurate that is to say they give
us the experience of an environment that is
significantly different from the environment
that we are really in mirages and other optical
illusions are examples of this another is that
we experience the earth to be at rest beneath
our feet despite its rapid and complex motion
in reality another is that we experience a single
universe and a single instance of our unconscious
selves at a time while in reality there are many
but these inaccurate and misleading experiences
provide no argument against scientific reasoning
on the contrary such deficiencies are its very
starting point pausing their my reflection yes so
this is the refutation of empiricism our senses
don't provide us with accurate information we need
science science is about explaining what we see
in terms of what we don't see it's the scene in
terms of the unseen my desk here made of wood
solid continuous matter it feels like feels
nice and smooth we know it's bumpy atoms
can't see the atoms my senses are not going to
be able to tell me that but we have theories
and we had theories of atoms before we had
scanning electron microscopes that could
produce images for us of those atoms
no image is possible no way of seeing
what is going on in the scent core of the sun
the core of the sun is not directly observable
we can see the surface but we know what's going
on there we know what's going on there because
of our explanations big bang no one's going to be
there to observe it no one was there to observe it
but we know what happened no one's going to see a
dinosaur almost everything in science is like this
we don't see the stuff that that really explains
what we do see whether because it's too small
too vast too far back in time so on and so forth
science is about the scene in terms of the unseen
we get an inaccurate experience of reality our
experience is virtual reality real reality yeah we
can come to approximate that uh more and more over
time more and more closely over time and we do
but still i mean we're just barely scratching the
surface as the beginning of infinity emphasizes
they're always at the beginning of infinity war
is just scratching the surface our virtual reality
rendering understanding improves over time that's
science that's a that's that kind of virtuality
and then there's the virtual reality of us just
being minds running on brains in the darkness
of our of our skulls that's where we really are
but we are connected to the rest of physical
reality via these imperfect sense gathering things
eyes and ears and hands and so on okay let's
keep going david writes quote we are embarked
upon solving problems about physical reality
if it turns out that all this time we have
merely been studying the programming of a cosmic
planetarium then that would merely mean that we
have been studying a smaller portion of reality
than we thought so what such things have happened
many times in the history of science as our
horizons have expanded beyond the earth to
include the solar system our galaxy other galaxies
clusters of galaxies and so on and of course
parallel universes another such broadening
may happen tomorrow indeed it may happen
according to any one of an infinity of possible
theories or it may never happen logically we must
concede to solipsism and related doctrines
that the reality we are learning about might
be an unrepresentative portion of a larger
inaccessible or incomprehensible structure
but the general refutation i have given of such
doctrines shows that it is irrational to build
upon that possibility following occam we shall
entertain such theories when and only when they
provide better explanations than simple rival
theories pausing there my reflection yeah exactly
reality realism rather realism allows for
progress to be made problems to be solved
the but the opposite solipsism well how do
you build on that what follows okay it's
all a dream okay what follows if what follows
jaron linear makes this problem if what follows
is well science still works in the same way
it would under realism you've just got an
unnecessary assumption don't you you know realism
is just work works but let's add on top of that
but it's all a dream why not just do away
with the but it's all a dream but it's all a
simulation and just get on with science because
that's the most parsimonious way of working
assume things are real david goes on to write
quote however there is a question we can still
ask suppose that someone were imprisoned in a
small unrepresentative portion of our own reality
for instance inside a universal virtual reality
generator that was programmed with the wrong laws
of physics what could such prisoners learn about
our external reality at first sight it seems
impossible that they could discover anything at
all about it it may seem that the most they could
discover would be the laws of operation i.e the
program of the computer that operated their prison
but that is not so again we must bear in
mind that if the prisoners are scientists
they will be seeking explanations as well
as predictions in other words they will not
be content with merely knowing the program
that operates their prison they will want to
explain the origin and attributes of the various
entities including themselves that they observe
in the reality they inhabit but in most virtual
reality environments no such explanation exists
for the rendered objects do not originate there
but have been designed in the external reality
suppose that you are playing a virtual reality
video game for the sake of simplicity suppose
that the game is essentially chess a first person
perspective version perhaps in which you adopt
the persona of the king you will use the normal
methods of science to discover this environment's
laws of physics and their emergent consequences
you will learn that checkmate and stalemate are
physically possible events a possible under your
best understanding of how the environment works
but that a position with nine white pawns is
not physically possible once you had understood
the law sufficiently well you would notice that
the chessboard is too simple an object to have
for instance thoughts and consequently that your
own thought processes cannot be governed by the
laws of chess alone similarly you could tell that
during any number of games of chess the pieces can
never evolve into self-reproducing configurations
and if life cannot evolve on the chessboard
far less can intelligence evolve therefore you
would also infer that your own thought processes
could not have originated in the universe in which
you found yourself so even if you had lived within
the rendered environment or your life and did
not have your own memories of the outside world
to account for as well your knowledge would not be
confined to that environment you would know that
even though the universe seemed to have
a certain layout and obey certain laws
there must be a wider universe outside it obeying
different laws of physics and you could even guess
some of the ways in which those wider laws would
have to be different from the chessboard laws
arthur c clarke once remarked that
any sufficiently advanced technology
is indistinguishable from magic this is true but
slightly misleading it is stated from the point
of view of a pre-scientific thinker which is the
wrong way around the fact is that to anyone who
understands what virtual reality is even genuine
magic would be indistinguishable from technology
for there is no room for magic in a comprehensible
reality anything that seems incomprehensible is
regarded by science merely as evidence there
is something we have not yet understood be
it a conjuring trick advanced technology or
a new law of physics pausing there just um
that seems like a tweetable quote doesn't it i'll
read it again anything that seems incomprehensible
is regarded by science merely as evidence that
there is something we have not yet understood
be it a conjuring trick advanced technology
or a new law of physics and he goes on to say
reasoning from the premise of one's own existence
is called anthropic reasoning although it has some
applicability in cosmology it usually has to be
supplemented by substantive assumptions about the
nature of one's self before it yields definite
conclusions but anthropic reasoning is not the
only way in which the inmates of our hypothetical
virtual reality prison could gain knowledge of an
outside world any of their evolving explanations
of their narrow world could at the drop of a hat
reach into an outside reality for instance the
very rules of chess contain what a thoughtful
player may realize is fossil evidence of
those rules having had an evolutionary history
there are exceptional moves such as castling and
capturing on passant which increase the complexity
of the rules but improve the game in explaining
that complexity one justifiably concludes that
the rules of chess were not always as they
are now in the popularian scheme of things
explanations always lead to new problems which in
turn require further explanations if the prisoners
fail after a while to improve upon their existing
explanations they may of course give up perhaps
falsely concluding that there are no explanations
available but if they do not give up they'll be
thinking about those aspects of their environment
that seem inadequately explained thus if the high
technology jailers wanted to be confident that
their rendered environment would forever fool
their prisoners into thinking there is no outside
world they would have their work cut out for them
the longer they wanted the illusion to last
the more ingenious the program would have to be
it is not enough that the inmates be
prevented from observing the outside
the rendered environment would also have to be
such that no explanations of anything inside
would ever require one to postulate an outside
the environment in other words would have to be
self-contained as regards explanations but i doubt
that any part of reality short of the whole thing
has that property end quote end of the
chapter long one today but as i think i hope
you will agree this just is so dense and deep
and sort of has feelers into the rest of the book
and the beginning affinity and the world
view as i say this this way of understanding
the place of human beings and people in the cosmic
scheme of things how it is that we can go about
creating an infinite stream of solutions to the
problems that we encounter via creating knowledge
and there's the bounds imposed by the laws of
physics are there and they're real but they don't
prevent us from making infinite progress which is
what optimism is all about but because this has
been a long one i won't have a long outro today
and instead i'll just say until next time bye
of course if you would like to support this
endeavor of me exploring the world view that
is contained within the philosophy of karl
poppo the the science and philosophy of
david deutsch constructor theory infinite progress
rational optimism so on and so forth all the all
the good stuff that we talk about here then
please go to my website www.bretthall.org
org and there there are links to
patreon paper until next time bye
up